Bede Viewpoint
Timeline for Bede's Ecclesiastical History

CHAPTER XXIV
CHRONOLOGICAL RECAPITULATION OF THE WHOLE WORK: ALSO CONCERNING
THE AUTHOR HIMSELF
I HAVE thought fit briefly to sum up those things which have been related more at large,
according to the distinction of times, for the better preserving them in memory.
In the sixtieth year before the incarnation of our Lord, Caius Julius Caesar, first of the Romans,
invaded Britain, and was victorious, yet could not gain the kingdom.
In the year from the incarnation of our Lord, 46, Claudius, second of the Romans, invading
Britain, had a great part of the island surrendered to him, and added the Orkney islands to the Roman
empire.
In the year from the incarnation of our Lord, 167, Eleutherius, being made bishop at Rome,
governed the Church most gloriously fifteen years. Lucius, king of Britain, writing to him, requested to
be made a Christian, and succeeded in obtaining his request.
In the year from the incarnation of our Lord, 189, Severus, being made emperor, reigned
seventeen years; he enclosed Britain with a trench from sea to sea.
In the year 381, Maximus, being made emperor ln Britain, sailed over into Gaul, and slew
Gratian.
In the year 409, Rome was crushed by the Goths, from which time Roman emperors began to
reign in Britain.
In the year 430, Palladius was sent to be the first bishop of the Scots that believed in Christ, by
Pope Celestine.
In the year 449, Martian being made emperor with Valentinian, reigned seven years; in whose
time the English, being called by the Britons, came into Britain.
In the year 538, there happened an eclipse of the sun, on the 16th of February, from the first to the
third hour.
In the year 540, an eclipse of the sun happened on the 20th of June, and the stars appeared during
almost half an hour after the third hour of the day.
In the year 547, Ida began to reign; from him the royal family of the Northumbrians derives its
241
original; he reigned twelve years.
In the year 565, the priest, Columba, came out of Scotland, into Britain, to instruct the Picts, and
he built a monastery in the isle of Hii.
In the year 596, Pope Gregory sent Augustine with monks into Britain, to preach the word of God
to the English nation.
In the year 597, the aforesaid teachers arrived in Britain; being about the 150th year from the
coming of the English into Britain.
In the year 6o1, Pope Gregory sent the pall into Britain, to Augustine, who was already made
bishop; he sent also several ministers of the word, among whom was Paulinus.
In the year 603, a battle was fought at Degsastane.
In the year 604, the East Saxons received the faith of Christ, under King Sabert, and Bishop
Mellitus.
In the year 605, Gregory died.
In the year 616, Ethelbert, king of Kent, died.
In the year 625, the venerable Paulinus was, by Archbishop Justus, ordained bishop of the
Northumbrians.
In the year 626, Eanfleda, daughter to King Edwin, was baptized with twelve others, on WhitSaturday.
In the year 627, King Edwin was baptized, with his nation, at Easter.
In the year 633, King Edwin being killed, Paulinus returned to Kent.
In the year 640, Eadbald, king of Kent, died.
In the year 642, King Oswald was slain.
In the year 644, Paulinus, first bishop of York, but now of the city of Rochester, departed to our
Lord.
In the year 651, King Oswin was killed, and Bishop Aidan died.
In the year 653, the Midland Angles, under their prince, Penda, received the mysteries of the faith.
242
In the year 655, Penda was slain, and the Mercians became Christians.
In the year 664, there happened an eclipse of the sun Earconbert, king of Kent, died; and Colman
returned to the Scots; a pestilence arose; Ceadda and Wilfrid were ordained bishops of the
Northumbrians.
In the year 668, Theodore was ordained bishop.
In the year 670, Oswy, king of the Northumbrians, died.
In the year 673, Egbert, king of Kent, died, and a synod was held at Hertford, in the presence of
King Egfrid Archbishop Theodore presiding; the synod did much good, and its decrees are contained in
ten chapters.
In the year 675, Wulfhere, king of the Mercians, dying, when he had reigned seventeen years, left
the crown to his brother Ethelred.
In the year 676, Ethelred ravaged Kent.
In the year 678, a comet appeared; Bishop Wilfrid was driven from his see by King Fgfrid; and
Bosa, Eata, and Eadhed were consecrated bishops in his stead.
In the year 679, Elfwine was killed.
In the year 680, a synod was held in the field called Hethfeld, concerning the Christian faith,
Archbishop Theodore presiding; John, the Roman abbot, was also present. The same year also the
Abbess Hilda died at Streaneshalch.
In the year 685, Egfrid, king of the Northumbrians, was slain.
The same year, Lothere, king of Kent, died.
In the year 688, Caedwalla, king of the West Saxons, went to Rome from Britain.
In the year 690, Archbishop Theodore died.
In the year 697, Queen Ostritha was murdered by her own people, that is, the nobility of the
Mercians.
In the year 698, Berthred, the royal commander of the Northumbrians, was slain by the Picts.
In the year 704, Etheired became a monk, after he had reigned thirty years over the nation of the
Mercians, and gave up the kingdom to Coenred.
243
In the year 705, Alfrid, king of the Northumbrians, died.
In the year 709, Coenred, king of the Mercians, having reigned six years, went to Rome.
In the year 711, Earl Bertfrid fought with the Picts.
In the year 716, Osred, king of the Northumbrians, was killed; and Coenred, king of the Mercians,
died; and Egbert, the man of God, brought the monks of Hii to observe the Catholic Easter and
ecclesiastical tonsure.
In the year 725, Withred, king of Kent, died.
In the year 729, comets appeared; the holy Egbert departed; and Osric died.
In the year 731, Archbishop Bertwald died.


http://www.heroofcamelot.com/docs/Bede-Ecclesiastical-History.pdf