Timeline Geological Viewpoint

4.6 billion years ago   Hadean Eon
4.4 billion years ago   First Stable continents and liquid water
						Grains of Zircon in the Jack Hills of Australia
4.28 billion years ago  Volcanic deposits of the Nuccuagittuq greenstone belt in Quebec Canada
4.0 billion years ago   Archaen Eon
						Eoarchean Age
3.7 billion years ago   Life: Prokaryotes
						3.5-3.7 bp bacteria and blue-green algae fossils appear in rocks
3.6 billion years ago   Paleoarchean Age
3.5 billion years ago   Barberton Complex in South Aftrica - likely a slice of oceanic crust
3.2 billion years ago   Mesoarchean Age
2.9 billion years ago   Huge pulse in the formation of island arcs and oceanic plateaus (to 2.7 billion years ago)
2.7 billion years ago   Neoarchean Age						
2.5 billion years ago   Proterozoic Eon
						Paleoproterozoic Age
						Rocks from this age found on all continents.  Rocks from this age often contain metallic ores - Iron, Gold, Copper, Uranium and Nickel
2.3 billion years ago   Oxygen starts collecting in the atmosphere (between 2.3 and 1.8 gya)
2.1 billion years ago	Life: Eukaryotes - first sexual reproduction
						Oxygen levels around 10%
						Rise of the Birimian in West Africa
2.1 billion years ago   Rise of the Wopmay Orogen in northwest Canada						
1.9 billion years ago   Rise of the Svecofennian in Finland
1.8 billion years ago   Rise of the Trans-Hudson mountain belt in Canada						
						Rise of the Ketilidian Orogen in southwestern Greenland
1.6 billion years ago   Mesoproterozoic Age
1.5 billion years ago	Life: Multicellular 
1.3 billion years ago   Rise of the Grenville belt of Mountains in Eastern North America (1.3 - 1.0 gya) - 4000 km long
1.1 billion years ago   Keweenawan Rift in North America extending from Michigan view Lake Superior to Kansas - 2000 Km long, 160 km wide 25 km thick basaltic lavas
1.0 billion years ago   Neoproterozoic Age
900 million years ago   Rise of the Braziliano, Namibian and Mozambique belts (900-500 mya) Also the Arabian-Nubian Shield
750 million years ago	Life: Animals
541 million years ago   Phanerozoic Eon
541 million years ago   Paleozoic Era
						Cambrian Age
						Life: Trilobites
520 million years ago	Life: Land Plants
483 million years ago   Ordovician Age
						During this period, the area north of the tropics was almost entirely ocean, and most of the world's land was collected into the southern supercontinent Gondwana. Throughout the Ordovician, Gondwana shifted towards the South Pole and much of it was submerged underwater.
442 million years ago   Silurian Age
						During this time, continental landmasses were low and sea levels were rising. This meant rich shallow sea ecosystems with new ecological niches. Silurian fossils show evidence of extensive reef building and the first signs that life beginning to colonize the new estuary, fresh water and terrestrial ecosystems.
						The supercontinent Gondwana had drifted southward and covered most of the southern latitudes. Much of the northern half of the planet was ocean with two smaller continents, Laurentia and Baltica, near the equator. Another micro-continent, Avalonia, rifted from the northern edge of Gondwana and drifted northward. Beginning in the late Ordovician and continuing throughout the Silurian and into the Devonian, the three northern continents collided, forming the new supercontinent, Euramerica. This collision resulted in a major mountain building event known as the Caledonian Orogeny. The hills and mountains of Scotland, Ireland, Wales and the northern Appalachians are remnants of this event, as are the mountains of Sweden and Norway.
414 million years ago   Devonian Age
						The supercontinent Gondwana occupied most of the Southern Hemisphere, although it began significant northerly drift during the Devonian Period.
356 million years ago   Carboniferous Mississippian Age
						The term "Carboniferous" comes from England, in reference to the rich deposits of coal that occur there.
313 million years ago   Carboniferous Pennsylvanian Age
						Used to distinguish between the 356 mya layer and the newer 313 mya layer in America
300 million years ago   Permian Age
252 million years ago   Mesozoic Era - Permian extinction event (Permian-Triassic)
252 million years ago	Triassic Age
						Continent - Pangaea
						Earliest Crustal Rocks found in todays oceans (252 - 66 mya)
230 million years ago	Life: Dinosaurs
						Life: Mammals 
200 million years ago	Jurassic Age
						Continents of Laurasia and Gondwanaland start drifing apart from Pangaea

145 million years ago   Cretaceous Age
						the continents were in very different positions than they are today. Sections of the supercontinent Pangaea were drifting apart. The Tethys Ocean still separated the northern Laurasia continent from southern Gondwana. The North and South Atlantic were still closed, although the Central Atlantic had begun to open up in the late Jurassic Period. By the middle of the period, ocean levels were much higher; most of the landmass we are familiar with was underwater. By the end of the period, the continents were much closer to modern configuration.
66 million years ago    Cenozoic Era
65.5 million years ago  KT - Boundary
						Tertiary Paleogene Age
						Paleocene Epoch
						Cenozoic rocks are extensively developed on all the continents, particularly on lowland plains, as, for example, the Gulf and Atlantic coastal plains of North America. They are generally less consolidated than older rocks, although some are indurated (cemented) as a result of high pressure due to deep burial, chemical diagenesis, or high temperature—namely, metamorphism. Sedimentary rocks predominate during the Cenozoic, and more than half the world’s petroleum occurs in such rocks of this age. Igneous rocks are represented by extensive early Cenozoic flood basalts (those of East Greenland and the Deccan trap of India) and the late Cenozoic flood basalts of the Columbia River in Washington, as well as by numerous volcanoes in the circum-Pacific System (the “Ring of Fire”) and ocean island chains such as Hawaii.
						Several of the world’s great mountain ranges were built during the Cenozoic. The main Alpine orogeny, which produced the Alps and Carpathians in southern Europe and the Atlas Mountains in northwestern Africa, began roughly between 37 million and 24 million years ago. The Himalayas were formed some time after the Indian Plate collided with the Eurasian Plate. These lofty mountains marked the culmination of the great uplift that occurred during the late Cenozoic when the Indian Plate drove many hundreds of kilometres into the underbelly of Asia. They are the product of the low-angle underthrusting of the northern edge of the Indian Plate under the southern edge of the Eurasian Plate.
						From about five million years ago, the Rocky Mountains and adjoining areas were elevated by rapid uplift of the entire region without faulting. This upwarping sharply steepened stream gradients, enabling rivers to achieve greater erosional power. As a result, deep river valleys and canyons, such as the Grand Canyon of the Colorado River in northern Arizona, were cut into broad upwarps of sedimentary rock during late Cenozoic time.

55.8 million years ago  Eocene Epoch	
						Greenland and Scandinavia separated from supercontinent of Laurasia
37 million years ago	Saharra Under water with whale fossils found/shells found						
33.9 million years ago  Oligocene Epoch
23 million years ago    Tertiary Neogene Age
						Miocene Epoch
						
10 million years ago 	Straits of Gilbralter Closed
						Mediterranean Sea evaporated
						
6 million years ago		Straits of Gilbralter reopen
						flooding the Mediterranean
						
5.3 million years ago   Pliocene Epoch
						


2.58 million years ago	Quaternary Age
						Pleistocene Epoch
						Life: First Hominins

1.5 million years ago   Eburon & Donau Glaciation
1.3 million years ago   Waal and Donau-Gunz interflaciation
900 thousand years ago  Nebraskan, Menapian and Cunz glaciation (till 780 kya)
700 thousand years ago  Aftonian, Cromerian and Gunz-Mindel interglaciation
640 thousand years ago  Kansan, Elsterian and Mindel glaciations
500 thousand years ago  Yarmouth, Holstein and Mindel-riss interglaciation (till 440 kya)
350 thousand years ago  Illinoian, Saale, Riss glaciation
140 thousand years ago  Sangamon, Eemian and Biss-Wurm interflaciation (till 115 kya)
60 thousand years ago   Wisconsin, Weichsel, Wurm glaciation (till 13 kya)
						
12,800 BP				Asteroid Impact on the North American Iceshelf
						Younger Dryas
11.700 years ago		Holocene

8000 years ago          Great Lake were individual basins


References
http://geology.com/time/geologic-time-scale.pdf
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HlcBF3dgGhs - Documentary Italy's Mystery Mountains 2014
https://www.britannica.com/science/Hadean-Eon
https://www.britannica.com/science/Archean-Eon
https://www.britannica.com/science/Quaternary